From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
>> This next story takes the phrase all
that and a bag of chips to a whole new
level.
>> Last week, a curious news story
enveloped New York.
>> I covered a lot of campaigns in my life
and I'm not sure I've ever seen anything
like this. It involved the mayor's race,
a reporter from the news outlet The City
named Katie Honen, and also
>> a bag of opened her sour cream and onion
ridge potato chips.
>> A bag of chips.
After a campaign event for Mayor Eric
Adams, one of the mayor's adviserss,
Winnie Greco, who has close ties to
China, insisted that Hone and take the
chips.
>> And she says, "Oh, have the chips. Have
the chips." I refused the chips multiple
times. "No, I don't want." She said,
"Take chips." I said, "No, it's okay.
Hey, I don't want any chips. And at a
certain point, I said, "Let me just hold
this in my hand as I walk with her." And
then we parted and I figured I would
just throw them out. And I walk outside
to the 125th Street station and right at
the top of the subway station, I just
look in the bag and I noticed a red
envelope
>> and inside a watt of cash.
>> $300 in cash.
Honen did not accept the money. Greco
later said that she'd made a mistake and
apologized.
>> I'm still really confused by everything
and just trying to wrap my head around
her motivation, why she gave it to me,
and what the whole point of it was.
>> Today, I talked to my colleague Mike
Foresight about how that incident
actually fits into a much larger story
he's been working on about how and why
China has been attempting to influence
American politics in New York and
beyond.
It's Thursday, August 28th.
Mike Forsight, welcome to the Daily.
>> Glad to be here.
>> So, Mike, last week when an adviser to
Mayor Eric Adams, this woman named
Winnie Greco, slipped a reporter a bag
of potato chips with $300 hidden inside
of it at a campaign event. I wondered
whether this was the most cartoonish
example of grift in a campaign that has
been absolutely riddled with allegations
of grift. But I wonder how you, somebody
who has covered China and local election
campaigns, how you viewed this.
>> I was really surprised as well, Rachel.
But I have to confess I have also
received an envelope with cash in it.
>> You have received one?
>> I have. This was 25 years ago. I'm
dating myself here. I was a Cub reporter
in Beijing and I went to a press
conference. I can't remember what it was
for, but it was a Chinese company. And I
was handed an envelope. It wasn't red. I
think it was white and it had cash in
it. Several hundred renman B, so maybe
about$25, $30.
>> And I was filled with righteous
indignation. I was insulted and I
angrily returned the envelope to the
conference organizers.
>> Wow.
Reporters in China often do get these
envelopes of cash. They're called
transportation fees. Chuf in Chinese.
So I I knew that this existed, but what
surprised me was that Adams, this
longtime adviser, Winnie Greco, would do
this, that she would actually give a red
envelope stuffed with cash inside a
potato chip bag to a reporter for an
American news organization. Mhm.
>> But, you know, maybe I shouldn't have
been so surprised because I'd actually
seen this for myself at Eric Adams
events through the course of the summer.
In the month of July, my colleagues and
I, Bianca Polaro and Jroo, myself went
to three Adams events in the ethnic
Chinese community. One was in Queens,
one was in Brooklyn, one was in
Manhattan's Chinatown. And at all three
events, we saw red envelopes of cash
being exchanged.
>> Oh my.
>> Yeah. Now, the Adams campaign said it
was unaware of any payments to reporters
and hadn't approved them. But the reason
we were at these campaign events is that
we were looking into a much bigger
story. And that story was the Chinese
government's interference in local
elections right here in New York City.
So your interest went well beyond
whether the Adams campaign knew about a
bag of chips with money stuffed into it,
>> right? And over many months of
reporting, my colleagues and I found
that the Chinese government has created
a very sophisticated system to influence
elections in New York at the city and
the state and even the congressional
level. It's all an attempt to suppress
views that go against the Communist
Party line and promote views and
policies that they support.
>> Okay. So, we're going to get into the
wise of all of this, why China thinks
it's even necessary to do that. But just
to begin, can you talk about when you
realize that there was a bigger story to
pursue here? So, it was last fall and
there had been a lot of news stories
going around about Chinese interference
in local and state politics and I was
looking into those stories and that's
when I heard about a state senator named
Ewenchu.
>> And who was Iwenchu?
>> Ewenchu is a woman who was born in
Taiwan.
>> I came to New York with a two-piece of
luggage all by myself. She came over
here in her 20s.
>> Everything's brand new to me.
>> She became a reporter for a Chinese
language newspaper here in New York
City.
>> Ewan is my Chinese name.
>> And then she got into politics, running
for a state senate seat
>> for Brooklyn. This name will mean so
much for my Asian community.
>> She won that election in the fall of
2022, and she became the first
Asian-American woman in the New York
State Senate. M
>> we need to have a seat at the table.
>> And to all my friends from Brooklyn.
>> And a few months after she took office,
she got an invitation from the president
of Taiwan who was visiting New York to
attend a banquet on Manhattan's west
side at a place called the Glass House,
which interestingly is only a few blocks
away from the Chinese consulate.
Taiwan's president at the time was a
woman named Tying Wen and she spoke at
the event
>> and we are confident that Taiwan would
continue to stand tall, free, democratic
and was dignity.
>> And it was kind of a delicate diplomatic
affair because the US doesn't really
officially recognize Taiwan.
>> And our reporting shows that there were
some local politicians who were invited
but who chose not to go.
But Ewenshu did go
>> and of course Ewenu was just honored to
do this. She came from Taiwan. It was a
great thing to be able to attend this
banquet.
>> That we are stronger when we stand
together in solidarity with fellow
democracies.
[Music]
But a few days after the banquet, things
started to change. And even when she
realized that there were a lot of people
and a lot of constituents that were
angry at her, calling her office asking
her, "Why did you go to this event?"
>> And presumably this anger about going to
an event hosted by the Taiwanese
president, this anger has to do with the
fact that China does not recognize
Taiwan's legitimacy, right? Is that what
they're so upset about? That's
absolutely right. Uh, China really
bristles at any attempt by the Taiwan
government and by its president to exert
itself on the international stage
because they consider Taiwan to be a
province of China. And Taiwan
independence is like the nogo zone, the
red line for the Chinese government.
They absolutely cannot countenance
Taiwan ever declaring independence. And
even Chu is surprised at this moment
that her constituents are making such a
big deal about this. And then a few days
after that, things got even more
interesting because her chief of staff
received an email from the Chinese
consulate in New York City
>> saying, "Hey, we'd like to meet with you
and discuss New York and China affairs."
So, the Chinese consulate, and they've
got one in New York, they've got a few
in California, um, Chicago, around the
country, just like the US has consulate
offices in China in many cities,
provides a lot of basic services to
Chinese citizens, uh, like passport
renewals and things like that. They have
these outposts around the country that
can do a lot of this diplomatic grunt
work. But there's another purpose for
these Chinese consulates, and that's to
keep an eye on the Chinese diaspora in
the United States.
>> Now, New York lawmakers and lawmakers
actually in many cities do receive
invitations from consulate officials
from many countries to have meetings.
And so, she took this meeting. It was at
a cafe in the Bay Ridge section of
Brooklyn. And this would have been in
April of 2023.
And it quickly became obvious that this
meeting was not just about discussing
New York and China affairs. The person
who came from the consulate was a guy
named Lee Sher Pong who was a deputy
console general. So he's a very senior
official and Mr. Lee said that this
issue had become explosive in the
community, that they were hearing from
her constituents, that they were very
upset that she attended this event.
>> Mhm.
>> So the senator Chu replies to this
Chinese diplomat that, "Hey, I'm just
focused on New York affairs. I don't
have any say over these global issues.
>> I don't have any say over America's
policy toward Taiwan." Basically,
>> she absolutely did not. She's a state
senator from New York representing a
part of southern Brooklyn.
>> Mhm.
>> But it was too late for Senator Chu.
After she went to this event with a
Taiwan president, everything changed. In
some sense, she became a pariah. A few
months later in an office in Sunset Park
in Brooklyn, Beijing's top power broker
in New York City, a guy named John Chan,
he has this meeting to pick out an
opponent to run against Ewan Chu. And
let me just explain here, John Chan is
the consulate's main man in New York
City. There's always a main person for
the consulate, and it's always a man.
And right now it's this guy John Chan, a
former Chinatown gangster who just a few
weeks after that would be in Beijing at
the Great Hall of the People at China's
annual legislative conference. That's
how close he is to the Chinese
government and the Communist Party. And
John Chan wanted to find somebody to run
against Ewin Chu.
>> It's a pleasure to be here everybody. My
name is Steve Chan.
>> And he found a Republican opponent who
was not born in Taiwan. someone who he
could work with and someone who he could
endorse.
>> I'm running for state senate in district
17.
>> That's exactly what he did.
>> I stand here before you today not as a
politician. I'm here as your neighbor.
I'm here as a friend.
>> And this Republican candidate defeated
Ewinu in the general election in 2024.
She was the only New York state senator
to lose. It was the only seat that
flipped and it cost Democrats their
supermajority in the New York State
Senate.
>> Wow. So clearly the influence of the
Chinese consulate was really effective
in this particular race,
>> right?
But we wanted to find out how that
happened. It appeared that the Chinese
consulate was pulling some strings to
get what they wanted out of this
election. But how how does the Chinese
consulate, the Chinese government's
outpost here in New York City, how did
they reach voters?
And that's what we set out to find out.
How far did this all go?
We'll be right back.
So Mike, Ewan Shu loses her seat in
part, it seems, because of this campaign
by the Chinese consulate to find and
back another candidate. But people still
need to vote for candidates. So I'm
wondering what connection, if any, you
found between the consulate and the
voters. So the first thing I did is try
to figure out more about this huge
Chinese American community in New York.
The number of ethnic Chinese people in
New York City is greater than any other
place outside of Asia. And it quickly
dawned on me and my colleagues Jay and
Bianca that this was a very organized
community in many ways and that there's
hundreds of these groups we call
hometown associations. In Chinese it's
tongang that represent people from the
home communities of these very very
diverse group of people ethnic Chinese
people in New York City. So these
hometown associations can represent an
entire province, a city, a district
within a city, or even a village. And
they are extremely active in New York.
So active that sometimes the hometown
associations that represent a village in
China have more members and have more
people going to their banquetss in New
York than there are villagers in the
village back in China.
>> Wow. So these are not unique to China.
Irishameans, German Americans,
Italian-Americans, all had heritage
clubs here in New York City.
>> And what exactly do they do here?
>> So most of the work of these hometown
associations is pretty innocent. People
come from the home country. They feel
uncomfortable. They don't speak the
language. Here's a group of people from
their same town, same city back in China
that can help them out and get them
adjusted to life in New York City. And a
lot of these people play a lot of ma
jang. If you go to Chinatown, go up to
the third or fourth floor walk up where
these hometown associations have their
clubhouse. You open the door, they're
all playing ma jang. And they like to
throw parties, lots of parties. They
have parties for Chinese New Year.
Sometimes they have parties for Chinese
National Day and they have lots of
parties when they have new officers,
like they have an inauguration for the
new president of this hometown
association. And we discovered that they
love to document all of their parties on
YouTube.
And what they show is that some of these
hometown associations are under the
influence of the Chinese consulate.
They fly the Chinese flag. They sing the
Chinese national anthem.
[Music]
And what we saw in many of these is
actually the Chinese consular officials,
the diplomats from the New York Chinese
consulate coming in there and giving the
new officers for these hometown
associations their oaths of allegiance
>> where they pledge to be, you know, very
good president of whatever organization
And some of the things that the hometown
association people were pledging to were
very anodine, you know, like be really
honest, you know, be good, love your
hometown, love your association.
>> Non-controversial things,
>> very non-controversial things. But
sometimes the things that they were
pledging oaths to, that they were
promising to uphold were core Chinese
policies.
And remember, these are American groups.
They are registered with the IRS or the
New York Department of State. And they
were pledging in some instances to work
for the reunification of China, which is
code word for absorbing Taiwan into the
mainland, for example.
They were actually using vocabulary
about uh revitalizing the motherland,
the homeland, which is words that are
exactly the words that Xiinping, China's
president, uses, for example. So,
they're they're paring Chinese policies
while taking an oath from a Chinese
government official
in Brooklyn.
>> What did you make of that?
>> I thought it was amazing and shocking.
It was it really surprised the heck out
of me and I just wanted to find as many
of these examples as possible so that we
could document it.
>> Good evening everyone. I'm Congresswoman
Grace Bang and it's such an honor to be
here with all of you
>> and we also saw a lot of New York
lawmakers come and also make speeches
and this makes a lot of sense because
these are their constituents. M
>> so you see people like Representative
Grace Mung who's the congresswoman from
Flushing, Senator Chuck Schumer, and a
lot of state assemblymen, city council
members really like to go to these
events. This is a great way for them to
reach out to the Chinese American
community, which is becoming an
increasingly powerful political force
here in New York City.
Okay, so it sounds like these hometown
associations are a really powerful way
of reaching voters and we know that the
consulate is involved in some of their
events, but what did you learn about
what role, if any, the hometown
associations played in Ewan Chu's
specific case, like in her loss? So this
was very difficult to report because
what we were learning is that the
consulate would talk to the leaders of
these hometown associations and then
those leaders of these hometown
associations would pass on whatever the
consulate was saying to these lawmakers
or to their members. And
>> the challenge for us was to document
this. We really needed some of these
hometown association members to fess up
basically to say, "Yeah, we met with the
consulate." And this was a real
challenge for us because they have no
interest in talking to us. So, it took
many, many months, but eventually we got
lucky. And what we learned was a few
days after went to this banquet with the
Taiwan president that hometown leaders
got called in to talk to the consulate
about this event. And we were able to
talk to one of them, a guy named Jenzin
Rong, who is a longtime leader of a very
large hometown association that's
located in Brooklyn. And he was called
into the consulate and there were two
diplomats from the consulate in the room
and they started asking him about this
banquet and about Senator Chu, you know,
and they they were asking questions
about, well, what do you think her
position is on Taiwan independence? And
so they were concerned that going to
this might indicate that she somehow
supported Taiwan independence. So
Jenzin, you know, was getting these
questions from the Chinese consulate and
the Chinese consulate was telling him
that they were hearing from the
community that people were upset about
Senator Chu going to this event. there
maybe subtly or not so subtly actually
trying to send this guy the message that
we do not like this woman's actions and
we do not like her.
>> Yeah, that's certainly the message that
he could have gotten and it was a
message that other hometown leaders got
as well. They had all backed her in her
2022 election victory. They were proud
to support somebody who is a Chinese
speaker, somebody who's ethnically
Chinese, and would be the first
ethnically Chinese person to represent
them in Brooklyn. But after she went to
this event with a Taiwan president, she
stopped getting invited to their many
functions that they had from Christmas
parties to Chinese New Year's
celebrations. M
>> and one by one, these hometown
associations dropped their support for
her and backed her Republican opponent.
And as I said before, she lost.
Okay, so I understand why the Chinese
government might not have liked that
attended this banquet because to them it
implied that she supported Taiwanese
independence, which they obviously do
not approve of. But what I don't
understand is the role of the hometown
associations because they are not
political, right? They do not work for
the government of China. And so why are
they even going along with what the
consulate says? Like why do they care
what the Chinese government through the
consulate is telling them to do?
>> So there's a lot of reasons why the
hometown associations have become such
useful tools for the Chinese consulate.
And of course, it's not all the hometown
associations. It's just a a select group
of them. And one of the reasons we found
out through our reporting is a fear that
their business interests back in China,
and a lot of these people have business
interests back in China, could be
jeopardized if they don't work closely
with the consulate, if they don't do
what they're told. Conversely, they're
looking for new business opportunities
as well. And if they forge close
relations with the consulate, they might
be able to get more business
opportunities. And in some cases, they
may still really have some nostalgia and
patriotism for the home country as well.
We've seen that with other ethnic groups
in New York as well, who proudly fly the
Irish flag or the Italian flag or the
Indian flag.
>> So Mike, you have basically described
this effort on Beijing's part to
influence local elections and you've
given us this one example of Ewan Shu,
but I'm wondering what other examples
you found and what else stood out to
you.
>> Right. So we we had this one compelling
example of Senator Ewan Chu, but one
example does not a story make. We had to
show that this was systematic. And it
turns out we found two other examples.
We found examples on the congressional
level and actually one on the city
council level as well. And maybe the
most shocking example is a guy who ran
for Congress in 2022.
He's a Chinese American. He was actually
a leader of the 1989 Tanamman student
protests. And so in 2022, he decided to
run for Congress. And he thought his
record as this man of principle would
really be a boon in this very Chinese
district in New York.
There were two very established
candidates uh running in that election
in the Democratic primary and he never
had a chance to win. But the Chinese
government was not taking any chances.
They do not want a leader of the Tanaman
student movement to have any possibility
of becoming an elected member of the US
Congress. And so what they did in this
case, according to a federal indictment
is had a spy work with a private
investigator in New York to undermine
his candidacy.
>> Oh my.
>> Yeah. The guy was an army chaplain. And
so they thought one thing they could do
maybe is hire a prostitute to entrap him
and destroy his reputation. Another
thing they were talking about doing was
beating him so that he couldn't run for
election in the first place. In addition
to this, hometown association leaders
were telling this guy, according to our
reporting, that they couldn't support
him because the Chinese consulate was
saying, "You cannot support this guy or
your business interests in China will be
affected." So, he was being undermined
in that respect too and not getting
support from the community that he
expected.
>> And presumably, he lost. He lost badly.
[Music]
>> Can I just step back for a second and
ask you maybe kind of a really basic
question, which is why does the Chinese
government care about local politics to
begin with? Like what does the state
assembly have to do with Taiwanese
independence?
>> You know, at first blush and on the
surface, it just seems crazy that they
would care so much about it. So you
really have to take a step back and
think how the Chinese government works.
And I don't want to give you a history
lesson, but the last dynasty of China,
theQing dynasty fell back in 1911, 1912.
And a lot of the revolutionary fervor, a
lot of the revolutionary ideas and the
leaders of this revolution that
overthrew China's last dynasty came from
the overseas Chinese community in places
like Tokyo. Uh and so those ideas kind
of fermented up overseas in the ethnic
Chinese community and came back to
China. The Chinese government knows
this. The Chinese government wants to
control the narrative in these huge
diaspora communities. Chinese Americans
in New York City, all 600,000 of them
have freedom of speech. They can say
whatever they want. That's not the case
back in China. So, this is the place
where ideas can be generated. This is
the place where opposition to the
Chinese government can really take hold
and to mature.
>> And they want to quash that kind of
disscent. They want to squish it like a
bug.
>> And so this is a real priority for them.
But there's another reason why the
Chinese government and the Chinese
Communist Party does this. They're
playing the long game.
>> If they can cultivate relationships
among politicians at the local level,
who's to say that these people don't
somehow rise up and maybe state senator
becomes a US senator, right? So many
national leaders in the United States
have come from local politics in New
York. Say Senator Schumer, the minority
leader of the US House, Hakee Jeff.
These people rose up from the ranks.
>> The number one and number two Democrats
in the US government
>> in the US government. And don't forget
just four years ago when Mayor Eric
Adams took office, people were talking
about him maybe running for president
someday. So they're playing the long
game, right? cultivate them now and
maybe later you're going to have a
really important ally at a high level of
government.
>> Now, I should say that we brought our
findings to the consulate and they
denied any wrongdoing. They said they
followed international law and have
never tried to influence US elections.
Mike, our whole conversation has been
about New York and New York politics,
but given what you guys uncovered about
sort of how sophisticated this is and
the aims of the Communist Party and how
they're playing the long game, I just
sort of wonder if you have any
indication about whether this is
happening elsewhere.
>> We know it's happening elsewhere. It's
happened in Australia. There's been
Chinese interference in Australian
politics and it's well documented in
Canada. It's happened again very well
documented by both the media and you
know the national intelligence services
there
and I think the concern here is the
Chinese government's ability to control
the narrative to make it so that talking
about more democracy in China and not
just for ethnic Chinese politicians but
for politicians in general who want to
win the vote of these communities that
talking about these issues that go
against the communist party the Chinese
government's lying is just something
best to be avoided. It's just too much
trouble. So why even bother? And that's
concerning because these beliefs of more
freedom for people like in Hong Kong or
Taiwan or China are really fundamental
beliefs that anyone around the world who
treasures liberty, freedom, democracy
should be deeply concerned about.
Mike Foresight, thank you so much. Thank
you, Rachel.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know. Today,
police identified the shooter who killed
two children and injured 17 at a
Catholic school in Minneapolis as a
23-year-old former student. While a
motive for the shooting was still
unclear as of Wednesday night, the
suspect's social media accounts
contained videos of diary entries that
described the killing of children and a
drawing of the sanctuary of the school's
church where the shooting took place as
the students were attending morning
mass.
>> So, we really didn't know what to do. We
just got into the pews and he shot
through the stained glass windows.
The shooter had barricaded the church's
doors and fired at students and teachers
through the windows. And
>> don't just say this is about thoughts
and prayers right now. These kids were
literally praying.
>> Court documents show that several years
ago, the shooter had filed to change her
first name from Robert to Robin. Within
hours of the shooting, some conservative
activists had seized on that detail on
social media to portray transgender
people as violent or mentally ill.
Officials said that the shooters social
media suggested a long history of anger
and grievance.
And the White House said late Wednesday
night that it had fired the director of
the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Susan Manarez, after a tense
confrontation between Dr. Manarez and
the Health Secretary, Robert F. Kennedy
Jr.
Kennedy had demanded Manarez's
resignation, which he had briefly
resisted before the White House
intervened.
The fight between the two officials
burst into public view on Wednesday as
four other highranking CDC officials
quit on mass, apparently out of
frustration over the agency's vaccine
policy, and Kennedy's leadership.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson, Mooch Sadi, Caitlyn O'Keefe,
Alex Stern, Sydney Harper, and Michelle
Bonja. It was edited by Maria Burn with
help from Michael Benois. research help
from Susan Lee and it was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]